Fix 317 - Revise Session Integrity Testing (#575)
OWASP/wstg: document/4-Web_Application_Security_Testing/06-Session_Management_Testing/03-Testing_for_Session_Fixation.md

## Summary

Session fixation is enabled by the insecure practice of preserving the same value of the session cookies before and after authentication. This typically happens when session cookies are used to store state information even before login, e.g., to add items to a shopping cart before authenticating for payment.

> In the generic exploit of session fixation vulnerabilities, an attacker can obtain a set of session cookies from the target website without authenticating and force them into the victim's browser, using different techniques. If the victim later authenticates at the target website and the cookies are not refreshed upon login, she will be identified by the session cookies chosen by the attacker, who will then become able to impersonate the victim (since her cookies are known to the attacker).

Reviewer: Fine, let's change it! I'm always confused with pronouns :)

> In the generic exploit of session fixation vulnerabilities, an attacker can obtain a set of session cookies from the target website without authenticating and force them into the victim's browser, using different techniques. If the victim later authenticates at the target website and the cookies are not refreshed upon login, she will be identified by the session cookies chosen by the attacker, who will then become able to impersonate the victim (since her cookies are known to the attacker).

Reviewer 2: Will do this before merging so that commits don't happen both ways

## Summary

Session fixation is enabled by the insecure practice of preserving the same value of the session cookies before and after authentication. This typically happens when session cookies are used to store state information even before login, e.g., to add items to a shopping cart.

In the generic exploit of session fixation vulnerabilities, an attacker can obtain a set of session cookies from the target website without authenticating and force them into the victim's browser, using different techniques; if the victim later authenticates at the target and the cookied are not refreshed, she will be identified by the session cookies chosen by the attacker, who will then become able to impersonate the victim.

> The issue can be fixed by refreshing the session cookies after the authentication, otherwise the attack can be prevented by ensuring the cookie integrity, i.e. using full [HSTS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HTTP_Strict_Transport_Security) adoption<sup>[1](#myfootnote1)</sup> or adding `__Host-` and `__Secure-` prefixes to the cookie name.

Reviewer 3: How about doing this more inline?
```suggestion
The issue can be fixed by refreshing the session cookies after the authentication, otherwise the attack can be prevented by ensuring the cookie integrity, i.e. using full [HSTS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HTTP_Strict_Transport_Security) adoption* or adding `__Host-` and `__Secure-` prefixes to the cookie name.

> * We refer to full HSTS adoption when a host activates HSTS for itself and all its sub-domains, and to partial HSTS adoption when a host activates HSTS just for itself.
> - Calzavara, S., Rabitti, A., Ragazzo, A., Bugliesi, M.: Testing for Integrity Flaws in Web Sessions.
```

Then remove the note and reference below?

## Summary

Session fixation is enabled by the insecure practice of preserving the same value of the session cookies before and after authentication. This typically happens when session cookies are used to store state information even before login, e.g., to add items to a shopping cart.

> In the generic exploit of session fixation vulnerabilities, an attacker can obtain a set of session cookies from the target website without authenticating and force them into the victim's browser, using different techniques; if the victim later authenticates at the target and the cookied are not refreshed, she will be identified by the session cookies chosen by the attacker, who will then become able to impersonate the victim.

Reviewer 3: "since the tokens were controlled by the attacker." ?

They do represent a logged in user (of the attacker's choosing), otherwise they'd be useless.

> In the generic exploit of session fixation vulnerabilities, an attacker can obtain a set of session cookies from the target website without authenticating and force them into the victim's browser, using different techniques; if the victim later authenticates at the target and the cookied are not refreshed, she will be identified by the session cookies chosen by the attacker, who will then become able to impersonate the victim.

Reviewer: I agree with @kingthorin here. I think his wording is fine.

> In the generic exploit of session fixation vulnerabilities, an attacker can obtain a set of session cookies from the target website without authenticating and force them into the victim's browser, using different techniques; if the victim later authenticates at the target and the cookied are not refreshed, she will be identified by the session cookies chosen by the attacker, who will then become able to impersonate the victim.

Reviewer 2: Updated the suggestion as per the comments.

### Test with Forced Cookies

This testing strategy is targeted at network attackers, hence it only needs to be applied to sites without full HSTS adoption (sites with full HSTS adoption are secure, since all their cookies have integrity). We assume to have two testing accounts on the website under test, one to act as the victim and one to act as the attacker. We simulate a scenario where the attacker forces in the victim's browser all the cookies which are not freshly issued after login and do not have integrity. After the victim's login, the attacker presents the forced cookies to the website to access the victim's account: if they are enough to act on the victim's behalf, session fixation is possible.

Here are the steps for executing this test:

1. Reach the login page of the website.
2. Save a snapshot of the cookie jar before logging in, excluding cookies which contain the `__Host-` or `__Secure-` prefix in their name.
3. Login to the website as the victim and reach any page offering a secure function requiring authentication.
4. Set the cookie jar to the snapshot taken at step 2.
5. Trigger the secure function identified at step 3.

> 6. Observe whether the operation at step 5 been performed successfully. If so, the attack was successful.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
6. Observe whether the operation at step 5 has been performed successfully. If so, the attack was successful.
```

...
```

As no new cookie has been issued upon a successful authentication the tester knows that it is possible to perform session hijacking. Unless the integrity of the session cookie is ensured.

> The tester can send a valid session identifier to a user (possibly using a social engineering trick), wait for them to authenticate, and subsequently verify that privileges have been assigned to this cookie.

#### Strategy

We assume to have a testing account on the website for the victim, that we call Alice.
We simulate a scenario where a network attacker (i.e., an attacker who has access to the same network as the victim) forces in Alice's browser all the cookies which are not freshly issued after login and do not have integrity against the attacker. After Alice's login, the attacker presents the forced cookies to access Alice's account: if they are enough to act on Alice's behalf, session fixation is possible.

Specifically, the testing strategy proceeds as follows:

1. Login to `www.example.com` as Alice and reach the page under test;

> 2. In case there is not full HSTS adoption, find the cookies which have not `__Host-` and `__Secure-` prefixes in the cookie name and were not freshly issued after the login process, then clear all the other cookies from the browser;

Reviewer: Correct. We want to keep just those cookies and delete the others.

3. Perform an operation on Alice's account under test;

> 4. Check: has the operation been performed? If yes, report as insecure;

Reviewer: Hey, if I understand correctly, the confusion might come from "were not freshly issued after the login process". By "freshly issued" we mean either of the following: 1) the cookie was not present before login or 2) the cookie was present before login, but its value changed upon login. Does this fix the issue? If it is clear, we can reason about a better wording.

> 4. Check: has the operation been performed? If yes, report as insecure;

Reviewer 2: That's not the concern. Freshly issued is well understood (by me, at least).
It's the flow.
1 -> Login
If the tester logs in, they don't know if the token changed or not.
2 -> Discusses a condition, and not a step. This can be improved by saying "Is the token the same pre and post login?".
Then step 3 -> Remove all tokens that don't follow X and Y practices. It doesn't really matter if it is "freshly issued" or not. Making it more straight forward is better since these are steps, not hypothetical talk. How do you validate a freshly issues token, etc.
From there, we can move forward with the steps I believe better. Does this make sense?

> 4. Check: has the operation been performed? If yes, report as insecure;

Reviewer: OK, please feel free to rephrase. I'll double-check the new version and possibly suggest improvements.

5. Clear the cookies from the browser;
6. Login to `www.example.com` as the attacker and reach the page under test;
7. Restore in the browser the cookies previously kept at step 2;
8. Perform again the operation under test;
9. Clear the cookies from the browser and login to `www.example.com` as Alice;

> 10. Check: has the operation been performed? If yes, report as insecure.

Reviewer 3: I too am confused by what the issue might be at step four, it's Alice using Alice's tokens. If there are actually two issues here then a flowchart might help. Otherwise the steps and concerns just need to be clarified.
```diff
- 2. In case there is not full HSTS adoption, find the cookies which have not `__Host-` and `__Secure-` prefixes in the cookie name and were not freshly issued after the login process, then clear all the other cookies from the browser;
+ 2. In case there is only partial HSTS adoption, keep track of the cookies which do not have `__Host-` and `__Secure-` prefixes in the cookie name and were not freshly issued after the login process, then clear all the other cookies from the browser;
```

> 10. Check: has the operation been performed? If yes, report as insecure.

Reviewer: Hi guys, let me elaborate on this. The key idea of the testing strategy is the following: a cookie is at risk against session fixation whenever 1. it is not freshly issued upon login and 2. it does not have integrity. If both these conditions are true, the attacker can pick cookies from an unauthenticated session, put them into the victim's browser and wait for the victim to authenticate. Since those cookies won't be refreshed, the victim's session will run with attacker-controlled cookies.

Our testing strategy thus tries to assess whether an operation is allowed through just cookies "at risk", hence simulating session fixation. Cookies can have integrity in two cases: 1. HSTS is activated with includeSubDomains or 2. cookie prefixes are used.

Is it clearer now or should I elaborate more on this?

> 10. Check: has the operation been performed? If yes, report as insecure.

Reviewer 2: We understand this. Does the reader understand it though? Our comments are mainly coming on the point where we are detailing a strategy which is vague and if someone were to follow it to the letter, might not get the expected outcome.

A tester is gonna start: Login, done. Check if it is freshly issued ... Oh, I don't know. Delete all tokens that don't have X and Y, okay. Perform action, done. Check ... Umm why is it insecure?

It's how clear and direct the steps are. My earlier comment should make things a bit clearer from my perspective.

> 10. Check: has the operation been performed? If yes, report as insecure.

Reviewer: Now it's clear what you mean. Feel free to update it, then I'll double-check.

> We recommend using two different machines and/or browsers for Alice and the attacker. This allows one to decrease the number of false positives if the web application does fingerprinting to verify an access enabled from a given cookie.

Reviewer 3: https://github.com/OWASP/wstg/blob/master/style_guide.md#andor
